For the majority of this class on Shopify theme programming,
we're going to be talking about liquid.
Liquid is the templating language of Shopify themes,
you can think of it as the back-end programming language of your Shopify theme,
and therefore your online storefront.
Of course, we can create online storefronts that link to Shopify as data in other ways.
But the majority of the time when somebody is using Shopify to host an online store,
they are using this online store sales channel in the way that
you customize the look and feel of your online store is through a theme.
You should be well familiar with this if you need to learn more about theme development,
what is a theme, and where it sits in the context of your store?
I have a series on YouTube and a previous class
on Shopify theme development here on Skill Share.
So this class is going to be primarily concerned with Shopify theme programming,
as the name suggests,
and so we're going to be learning more about programming patents,
so we're going be working with Liquid a lot.
That being said, last class,
we worked directly with the Debut theme,
which is an already built theme that looks like this,
if you're not familiar,
it's a already built theme.
You don't really need to go in and build basic features,
unless you need to create something that doesn't exist already.
Because if you look at the code of this theme,
it's already quite full,
so if I look at any given section,
you'll see it's quite full of code.
In this class, what I'm going to do,
is instead of starting from the point of an actual theme,
which is more practical if you're actually doing Shopify theme development,
I'm going to start with a very bare-bones theme called New Theme.
This theme right here you can see is very bare-bones.
The homepage has nothing on it,
if I click Catalog,
it takes me to the collection where I see all products,
and it's currently paginating by two products at a time.
Keep in mind that in order for you to test and actually program a Shopify theme,
you're going to need some store data,
so I've put in this dummy data already.
You'll need to put in some test products as well if you want anything to display.
If I click on Blog,
you can see I've copied over some blog posts from the official Shopify website.
Now, if you want to code along,
and use this exact theme,
the way I generated this theme,
and the reason why it's called the New Theme is,
because I used a command in Theme Kit, called,
Theme New, so for those of you who aren't familiar with Theme Kit,
we're not going to go into great detail,
I have a 20 minute lesson in my last class here on Shopify theme development,
all about how to set it up and configure it,
but this is what I'm talking about when I talk about Shopify Theme Kit.
It's basically a command line tool that you can use to download your theme,
and then you can edit it with your own computer.
I highly recommend if you're doing Shopify theme development seriously,
you use the Theme Kit.
But as this class is not really about development workflow and just about programming,
I'm going to be using the online code editor,
so I'm going to just click Edit code here,
and we're going to edit it straight from here.
Now I should mention
one other framework and tool that you can use to create Shopify themes,
it's called slate, so if I type in Shopify Slate into Google,
you can learn more about it.
As you can read on this GitHub page,
slate is on low maintenance.
Slate is a project that Shopify have
created but they're not really maintaining at the moment,
that could change in future,
and slate is a lot more technical and hard to setup,
so we're not going to be focused on slate in this class as well.
I just thought it would be remiss of me not to mention,
and again, if you want to learn more about slate,
there is a bonus video in the previous class
on Shopify theme development, go check it out.
It is the second last video.
Now, getting rid of that tab there and going back to our New Theme here,
the reason why I wanted to start with the New Theme is it's quiet bare,
so we can see here there's not a lot Liquid code,
there's only 10 lines in the index file,
there's only one layout,
and if we go down here to sections and snippets,
they are completely empty.
There's only one language file and one CSS file,
and one JavaScript file.
This is pretty bare-bones,
and it's going to allow us to learn the concepts
of Liquid programming easier without having to
sift through a whole bunch of HTML and CSS that would exist on a fully built theme.
As I previously mentioned,
you can consider Liquid the back-end programming language of Shopify themes.
What I mean by that is that all this code is generated on the server side,
and then it comes through the client side in HTML and CSS.
Just to demonstrate that for those of you who the concept is not particularly clear,
look at all these liquid tags,
these aren't going to come through on the front end,
is all generated on the server side,
and then it comes through on the front end as just HTML and CSS,
so if I click on this page,
which gets me to the collection template,
and I inspect what's going on here,
I won't see any Liquid code whatsoever.
The Liquid code is all on the server side,
so the reason why that's important is,
because anything I want to do that I want on the client side,
still has to be done with JavaScript,
and that becomes an issue of how do we access that data using JavaScript,
and then work with it on the front end without having to reload the page.
You should be familiar with the difference between server side and client side, if not,
check out my first class on Skill Share,
I have a video on the difference between front-end and back-end.
But that is just something to note.
Liquid covers most of Shopify the programming, but of course,
if you want more interactive features,
if you want to avoid reloading the page,
you're going to have to use JavaScript.
Back to the code, you can see a bunch of Liquid tags,
and you can see that they even start with a curly bracket and a percentage sign,
and end with a percentage sign curly bracket,
or there are just two curly braces,
and the difference between these two tags is,
this is for logic,
and this is for output.
What I mean by that is,
if I just throw collection dot title in-between these double curly braces tags,
it'll just output the collection title.
There's no operations or logic happening on it,
unless of course, I use a filter which is down here.
Obviously, there's a lot of concepts and syntax within Liquid,
and for that, I have created my own documentation for that.
This is my blog post which is not currently out yet,
but will be out by the time you're watching this video,
so I'm still working on it.
But essentially, this is going to be the textbook or reference for this class,
so it's a very long article,
I cover all the objects,
all the filters, all the tags within Liquid,
so for this class,
I thought of going through all the theory,
but I thought it's going to be a lot better for you to actually read up on this stuff,
and then we can actually practice and see it in action in our theme,
so I'm going to create these patterns and break this down,
but for reference, we're going to use this document.
This article is going to be at christhefreelancer.com/shopify_liquid_guide,
so definitely open that up,
have a read, you don't have to read the whole thing.
I definitely recommend you skim-read once it gets to the objects,
but this is going to be your reference.
Also, there are two other resources that I want to link you to,
and they're actually linked in the article,
the actual official documentation,
so on areas where it gets in-depth from we talk about the list of attributes,
the Liquid reference is still going to be
a great place for you to learn all about the different objects,
tags, and filters within Liquid,
so it has an incredible amount of detail, for instance,
if I go into,
let's say the product object,
you'll see all the attributes,
and you can learn all about them,
so this article is not intended to replace the documentation,
but it's a good starting point,
and I think a good overview of how it all works,
and it links to the documentation numerous places.
There's also the famous Cheat Sheet,
so open that up in another tab,
and this right here is all of the objects, tags,
and filters on the same page,
for instance, if I wanted to figure out how to get the title of a product,
I could Control-F product,
and then I find this little accordion here for the product object,
gives me all the same things we were looking at before in the documentation,
but in this tight little accordion,
and then it gives me a little bit of information about that,
then I can click Learn more and it'll take me straight back to the documentation.
These are the resources I recommend having open,
or having ready while you take this class,
the Cheat Sheet for quick reference,
got the documentation for anything detailed,
and of course my article as an overview of Shopify Liquid,
and if you're struggling to understand,
what one of these things are,
where you can find these objects,
my guide is what is intended to help that.
As I've written here at the start of the article,
"While Shopify's Liquid Reference and the famous Cheat Sheet are great,
I feel like there's a lot of details missing and that's why
I've decided to write my own documentation."
So as I mentioned,
there's a few things that Shopify doesn't really talk about,
the different types of objects,
and where they're available in the scope of your Shopify theme,
that is the main reason why I wrote this article, you can see here,
not only can you learn more about objects,
but you can also learn,
do they hold multiple objects?
Where can you access them?
Can you loop through them?
So just an extra reference there for you.
If you have any questions,
specific questions about Liquid,
please check the blog post first,
and then if you're still struggling,
definitely leave a comment in the discussion box.
Now, we mentioned JavaScript before as the way we're going
to do anything interactive on our Shopify theme,
and one way that Shopify allows us to access and
manipulate data from our Shopify theme using JavaScript is,
through the Ajax API,
so if I search for,
Shopify Ajax API, you can learn more about it here.
But we're going to have a full lesson or two on the Ajax API. Don't worry.
Just making you aware that we have an API for doing client-side request as well.
The other code you're going to write when you're programming
shopify themes is CSS or SCSS.
You should be familiar with CSS.
If you're not familiar with SCSS,
it is a form of SASS,
which is basically a programming language for CSS.
It is not required to know the syntax of SASS.
SASS is backwards compatible with CSS and in fact,
once the code gets to the front end,
it's always compiled to CSS anyway.
If you want to put in CSS specifically in here,
you can do so as normal but,
if you know how to use SASS,
you can use it as well.
For those of you who do know how to use SASS,
one warning is that shopify uses an older version of SASS.
I believe it's 3.3 or something like that.
It just means that all of the features of the latest version of
SASS won't be available to you when you're developing shopify themes.
If you come across anything a little bit weird, that's breaking,
that is perfectly fine syntax,
it might be because you're using an older version of SASS.
Another warning there. Don't worry.
If you don't know anything about SASS,
CSS is totally fine.
The final syntax that you'll have to get used to with shopify themes,
of course we've got Liquid,
we've got JavaScripts, and we've CSS/SCSS.
But you'll also see here we've got JSON files.
If I open up settings_schema.json,
this is JavaScript Object Notation, aka JSON.
It's just a way of easily presenting data.
It mimics the structure of a JavaScript object but it has some differences.
You can read more about JSON on Google,
but it's quite simple to understand.
Right here we have an array opening up,
and then inside we have an object.
If we wanted to write another object in here,
we would do so like this and we can give it keys and values here.
All the keys need to be with a double quote.
That's one of the key differences with JSON and any strings obviously with quotes as
well unless we are putting in a number which we don't need quotes for.
Alright. The areas that you'll see JSON in these settings_schema.json file,
the settings_ data.json file and your locale files, en.default.json.
Again, we're going to go over JSON and how that all
works with these various files in a later video. Don't worry about that.
Just giving you a quick overview before we jump into the liquid stuff.
That pretty much covers all the areas of your Shopify theme.
You should know about themes structure from the last class.
We've got layout, templates, sections,
and snippets for structuring our shopify theme.
Then we've got our assets which hold the CSS and JavaScript,
config which holds data and the settings that we're
able to change and locales for storing language.
The final thing I need to mention in
this introductory video is something that's very important to Shopify Theme Programming,
and that is the idea of templates and scope.
If we go and preview our theme and navigate to certain pages,
you can see our template structure in the URL structure.
Right now we're on the root domain.
Don't be confused about this little extra attribute there.
But we're on the root domain,
which is the index template.
If we go to here,
you can see that the URL changes to collections/all.
This means we're on the collection template.
If I change the actual collection that we're looking
at to one I have in my store called featured collection,
you can see everything looks the same,
It's just the title of the collection that gets displayed
here and the actual products that show up on the page is different.
All of this is controlled by the one collection template.
If I click on any one of these products,
you'll see that we get products and then the name of the product in handle form,
we'll talk more about handles later,
gets added to the URL.
Now we know where in the product template.
If I go back to my collection page and I click on this product,
you'll see it shows up pretty much
the exact same way as the other product because it uses the same template.
How this looks in our code is,
we go into our templates here,
and here is the code that will show up for every single collection page.
The reference to collection here really depends on what collection you're on.
But it's completely dynamic so that any collection you're on gets fed into here through
the collection object and you can manipulate whatever collection gets
passed in the same way you would another collection.
When you're on the product page,
you are on the product template.
It's the same code for every product that
gets displayed on your website unless you use alternate templates,
which we talked about in the last class,
but essentially, everything that will change on the page is the dynamic content
and that is brought in here with this product object.
I talk about this in the article I call templates specific scope.
If we scroll down,
I talk about the objects that can be accessed from
anywhere in your theme as global objects.
If you know the actual name of your product,
you can access it from anywhere in your theme by using its handle.
The same can be said for pages, blogs, articles, images.
Images is through the file name there.
But then you get to template specific variables if you scroll down,
template specific objects rather.
These objects are available when you're in the respective template.
If you're in the product template,
you have access to the product object
and that product object is whatever product you're viewing,
and you can see that from the URL.
We are looking at black leather bag.
When we do things with the product object in the product template,
we're looking at that black leather bag.
The templates that we have here all
have their own objects which should be labeled the same.
In the collection template, we have access to the collection object.
In the blog template we have access to the blog object.
Templates right here, and this is something we'll
get more into coding templates and layouts in the next video,
but templates is basically the different groups of pages that show up in your website.
Sections very powerful and snippets great for reusing code.
We'll talk about them in the lesson after the next one.
But I think I've talked at length already about Shopify Liquid.
Again, these are all great references.
I don't want to go through the entire document because it's huge.
But in the next video,
we're going to jump straight into coding
a common pattern in shopify and learning how to use alternative layouts.
I will see you in the next one.